Preprocessing
*************

*Note: All times and dates are in UTC except as otherwise noted.*

This preprocessing pipeline translates tweets from raw JSON to a form more
suitable for later study.

Overview
========

QUAC preprocessing has three basic steps:

#. Collect tweets using the streaming API. (``collect`` script.)

#. Convert the tweets from the raw JSON, de-duplicate and clean them up, and
   produce nicely organized and ordered TSV files. (``parse.mk`` makefile.)

#. Geo-locate tweets that do not contain a geotag. (``geo.mk`` makefile.)


File organization
=================

A fully populated data directory looks something like this:

* :samp:`raw/` --- Raw JSON tweets fresh from the Streaming API.

  * :samp:`2012-04/` --- Tweets from ``collect``. Each month gets its own
    directory.

    * :samp:`20120401_003115{.json.gz}` --- Sequence of JSON tweet objects.

    * :samp:`20120401_003115{.stats}` --- Text file containing a few statistics
      about the above.

    * :samp:`20120401_003115{.2012-03-31.raw.tsv}` --- Direct TSV translation
      of tweets from March 31 contained in the JSON file above (i.e., still
      contains duplicates and is in arbitrary order).

    * :samp:`20120401_003115{.2013-04-01.raw.tsv}` --- A given JSON file can
      have tweets from multiple days, so it may produce more than one
      ``.raw.tsv`` file.

    * :samp:`20120401_003115{.d}` -- Makefile listing dependencies related to
      the above JSON and ``.raw.tsv`` files.

    * ... (lots more of the above)

  * :samp:`legacy/` --- Subdirectories don't have to be named after dates.
    (Perhaps you have some existing Twitter data that were not collected with
    QUAC.)

  * ... (more subdirs)

* :samp:`pre/`

  * :samp:`2012-03-31{.all.tsv}` --- Processed tweets from March 31 from all
    raw JSON files. No duplicates and in ascending order by tweet ID.

  * :samp:`2012-03-31{.geo.tsv}` --- Subset of the above that contain a
    geotag.

  * ... (two ``.tsv`` per day in the data)

  * :samp:`metadata` --- Python pickle file summarizing metadata for the above
    files.

* :samp:`geo/` --- `FIXME`

In addition to the above, you will find ``.log`` files scattered about. These
are simply log files produced during processing.


File formats
============

Raw JSON tweets
---------------

Each raw tweet file (``.json.gz``) is a gzipped sequence of JSON-encoded
tweets in the `format documented by Twitter
<https://dev.twitter.com/docs/platform-objects>`_, separated by newlines
(i.e., a file cannot be parsed as a single JSON object). Non-tweet objects do
appear; these are also JSON encoded. Newlines do not appear within encoded
tweets, so they can safely be used as a separator. Files are named with a
timestamp of when collection started for that file (time zone is *local*, a
historical artifact which will not be fixed -- be careful!) and placed in a
1-level hierarchy by year and month. The collection process caps the number of
tweets in each raw file to a "reasonable" number that changes occasionally.

Along with each ``.json.gz`` is a ``.stats`` file. This contains a few
statistics about the raw file's data, though its key purpose is simply to mark
that the collector closed the tweet file in an orderly way. Bare ``.json.gz``
files may be still in progress, broken, etc. and should be read with caution.
Tweets are Unicode and indeed contain high characters, so care must be taken
in handling character encodings.

`collect` saves the raw bytes of each tweet it receives from the Twitter
Streaming API, without any parsing or encoding/decoding. There are a few
quirks of this stream. (I am pretty sure, but not 100% sure, that these are
all real, and not quirks of Python -- they're consistent between `curl`,
Firefox, and my Python code.) These quirks do not appear to affect the
parsability of the JSON.

* While the encoding of the output is ostensibly UTF-8, it appears that high
  characters are escaped with the "\uXXXX" notation. For example::

     "text":"\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606#Cruzeiro"

* Some text has excessive escaping. For example, forward slashes do not need
  to be escaped, but they are anyway::

     "source":"\u003Ca href=\"http:\/\/blackberry.com\/twitter"

TSV files
---------

The raw tweet files are not so convenient to work with: JSON parsing is slow,
and tweets can be duplicated and out of order (including between files, which
makes parallelization difficult). Therefore, we pre-process the JSON into a
TSV format which addresses these issues. The final product is a pair of TSV
files for each day:

* :samp:`YYYY-DD-MM.{all}.tsv` --- For each day, we build one
  tab-separated-values (TSV) file containing tweets created on that day, in
  ascending ID order. There is no header line, no quoting, and no
  within-record newlines or tabs (these are stripped before storing the
  tweets). There is some other cleaup that goes on as well; consult the source
  code for this. The encoding is UTF-8. The files contain the following
  possibly-empty fields, in this order (note that field names generally
  correspond to those in the JSON; refer to the Twitter docs):

  #. *id*: Tweet ID from Twitter (64-bit integer)
  #. *created_at*: When the tweet was created, in `ISO 8601 format
     <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601>`_.
  #. *text*: The actual "message"; free text
  #. *user_screen_name*: free text with some restrictions
  #. *user_description*: free text
  #. *user_lang*: `ISO 639-1 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1>`_
     language code set by user. Note that this is a fairly unreliable means of
     determining the language of ``text``. `FIXME: take advantage of new
     lang tweet attribute when it comes out.`
  #. *user_location*: free text
  #. *user_time_zone*: self-selected from a few dozen options
  #. *location_lon*: longitude of geotag (WGS84)
  #. *location_lat*: latitude of geotag
  #. *location_src*: code indicating source of geotag; one of:

     * ``co``: ``coordinates`` attribute (GeoJSON)
     * ``ge``: ``geo`` attribute (an older form of official geotag) `FIXME`
     * ``lo``: coordinates appearing in user ``location`` field `FIXME`
     * ... `FIXME`

* :samp:`YYYY-DD-MM.{geo}.tsv` --- The subset of the above which have a
  geotag.

There are also intermediate TSV files (``.raw.tsv``) which are in the above
format but have not yet had de-duplication and re-ordering. Downstream
applications should ignore them.

`FIXME`:

* Try gzipping the TSV files. Some quick and dirty tests suggest that
  processing time (with ``gzip -1``) will roughly double and file sizes will
  roughly halve.

Preprocessing metadata file
---------------------------

This file is a pickled Python dictionary containing metadata about the
directory of preprocessed TSV files. It currently contains one item:

#. ``days`` is a ``dict`` listing metadata for the daily TSV files above. Keys
   are ``datetime.date`` instances, and values are dictionaries with the
   following fields:

   * *count*: Number of tweets
   * *count_geotag*: Number of geotagged tweets
   * *min_id*: Minimum tweet ID in the file
   * *max_id*: Maximum tweet ID in the file

*Note: The metadata file used to contain information about the raw tweet files
as well. This proved to be not so useful, and so it hasn't been reimplemented
in the new make-based processing scheme.*

Geo-located tweets
------------------

`FIXME`

* TSV, one per day
* Tweet ID, pickled Geo_GMM instance
* GMM even if geotagged

Alternatives that were considered and rejected
----------------------------------------------

We tried the following and ultimately rejected them (for now). A key
requirement (as of 2/21/2013) is that we'd like convenient parallel access and
not to mess with setting up servers.

* Postgres: We tried using Postgres, which is a very nice open source RDBMS
  that has great spatial support (PostGIS), but it was just too slow. Also, it
  requires setting up a server and doesn't lend itself to a distributed
  approach.

* DBM-style databases (e.g., BerkeleyDB): We need key/tuple storage, not just
  key/value (unless we want to do our own pickling of Python objects into
  values, which seems lame).

* SQLite/SpatiaLite: Again, rather slow, and overkill since we need key/tuple
  storage. Doesn't support streaming or parallel access very well.

* ZODB: This is a Python-native object database (from the Zope project). I
  implemented it as far as actually storing data, but the documentation is
  poor (e.g., the ZODB Book recommends a technique for subtransactions that
  doesn't work any more), the interface is a bit awkward, it produces several
  files per database, and the databases are rather large (a subset of 8 fields
  is nearly as large as the gzipped raw tweet files).

* NoSQL: There are lots of very hip NoSQL databases (e.g. CouchDB, MongoDB,
  etc.). However, none seem to offer both an embedded option (i.e., no server
  process) and key/tuple (document- or column-oriented?) rather than simply
  key/value.
